JUDY WOODRUFF: Now to another
in our Brief But Spectacular
series, where we ask people
to describe their passions.
Tonight, we hear from Academy
Award-winning documentary
filmmaker Laura Poitras.
Her latest film is "Risk,"
which looks at WikiLeaks
and Julian Assange.
LAURA POITRAS, Documentary
Filmmaker: It's a bit surprising
that I do documentaries,
because I consider myself
to be a really shy person.
And there's something about
the documentary form that I
guess it sort of -- it kind of
gives you an invitation, maybe,
to go places you wouldn't go
otherwise or to take risks
you wouldn't take otherwise.
My filmmaking is -- kind
of comes in a tradition
of observational cinema
or cinema verite.
Legendary founders of it
is D.A. Pennebaker, Albert
Maysles, Frederick Wiseman.
They capture human stories.
They capture drama, and they
capture history as it unfolds.
When you talk to people and
who they tell you who they are
is oftentimes different than
their actions.
And so I'm interested in
people's actions and choices.
So, for instance, sitting in a
hotel room with Edward Snowden,
as he's making this monumental
decision to leak this
information, is an example
of the type of cinema
that I'm interested
in doing.
The last two films I have
done, "Citizenfour" and
"Risk," I became a participant.
There were things that were
happening that were happening
because of work that I was
doing, reporting on the NSA.
I mean, if you expose the
deepest levels of intelligence
agencies, they do tend to pay
attention to what you're doing.
I was placed on a government
terrorist watch list in 2006,
and was detained at the U.S.
border for -- probably
50 times, interrogated.
I have had computers
confiscated.
I have had notebooks
photocopied.
They have subpoenaed my records.
They would send FBI agents
to my film screenings to
see what I said in Q&As.
MAN: There's a filmmaker
named Laura Poitras.
Laura Poitras is known through
the defense community as a
documentary filmmaker who is
anti-U.S.
LAURA POITRAS: I became really
interested in WikiLeaks and
Julian Assange in 2010, like
a lot of people, first when
they published the video of
Collateral Murder, the Apache
helicopter footage
that showed killings of
Iraqis, by U.S. military.
And having made a film about
the war in Iraq, I knew that
this was the kind of thing that
was happening every day there.
I reached out to WikiLeaks and
Assange during that time and
then started filming in 2011.
And I was interested in how
they were changing journalism.
I had somewhat of a falling out
with him over the film, where
he wanted me not to use scenes
in the film.
One of the scenes that Julian
wanted removed from the film
is the scene where his lawyers
are giving him advice about
how to speak publicly of
-- around these allegations
of sexual assault.
JULIAN ASSANGE, Founder,
WikiLeaks: It's just a
thoroughly tawdry, radical,
feminist, political
positioning thing.
It's some stereotype.
LAURA POITRAS: I still have
enormous respect for, like, the
project of WikiLeaks and its
importance, because I
think they have done
extraordinary publishing.
I'm always interested in access.
Like -- you know, like, I would
love to have access to Robert
Mueller's investigation into
Donald Trump, or James Comey.
But I think those are
going to be pretty tough
to get access to that.
But, yes, I'm really looking
forward to like the really good
documentary that's capturing
what's happening right
now in our politics.
I hope it's being
documented by someone.
My name is Laura Poitras,
and this is my brief take
on documentary filmmaking.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And you can
watch additional Brief But
Spectacular episodes at
PBS.org/NewsHour/Brief.